JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
Then there were three. Donald
Trump is now
the Republican Party's
presumptive nominee
for president, as Bernie Sanders
scores a
win against Hillary Clinton in
Indiana.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Wednesday:
on the ground in Iraq after ISIS
fighters
kill a member of the U.S. Navy
SEALs in a
large-scale attack near Mosul.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus: Are today's
kids addicted
to their digital devices? We
hear from the
creator of the new documentary
"Screenagers."
DR. DELANEY RUSTON, Filmmaker,
"Screenagers":
I knew, as a mom, that, every
day, there was
tension in the house, and I felt
completely
out of control on what to do,
what kind of
limits to set, how this was
affecting them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Republican
presidential
race is effectively over as of
tonight, and
the party's new leader is
looking ahead. At
the same time, detractors now
face a decision:
how to reconcile with the new
reality.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: On his first day as
the apparent
Republican nominee, Donald Trump
said he's
confident the party will fall in
behind him,
but that some were welcome to
leave.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I don't think it's imperative
that the entire
party come together. I don't
want everybody.
I don't even want certain people
that were
extraordinarily nasty. Let them
go their own
way.
JOHN YANG: Trump, who rails
against politics
as usual, said he's looking for
a running
mate with a political background
to help him
navigate Washington.
It took just a little more than
300 days for
the outsider to demolish a field
of 16 rivals,
including current and former
officeholders
with more than a century of
combined government
experience.
Late today, the last opponent
standing, Ohio
Governor John Kasich, made it
official.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
As I suspend my campaign today,
I have renewed
faith, deeper faith that the
lord will show
me the way forward and fulfill
the purpose
of my life.
JOHN YANG: Ted Cruz quit last
night after
Trump routed him in the Indiana
primary.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
We gave it everything we have
got, but the
voters chose another path.
JOHN YANG: Party chairman Reince
Priebus said
it's time for the party to get
behind Trump
and start working toward
November.
REINCE PRIEBUS, Republican
National Committee
Chairman: We have got to unify.
We need time
to unify. And -- and we will
unify. But this
is what today starts, which is
this unification
process.
JOHN YANG: But a parade of
prominent Republicans
is heading for the exits, some
even burning
their voter registration cards.
Freshman Senator Ben Sasse of
Nebraska said
he could never vote for Trump,
tweeting last
night: "Reporters keep asking if
Indiana changes
anything for me. The answer is
simple. No."
And one-time Trump rival senator
Lindsey Graham
tweeted, "If we nominate Trump
we will get
destroyed, and we will deserve
it."
Despite losing Indiana,
Democratic front-runner
Hillary Clinton now claims 93
percent of the
delegates needed to clinch her
party's nomination.
But Bernie Sanders made clear
last night he's
not going anywhere.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I understand that Secretary
Clinton thinks
that this campaign is over. I
have got some
bad news for her.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Clinton, meanwhile,
turned her
attention to Trump, as she did
today on CNN.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I have seen the presidency up
close from two
different perspectives, and I
think I know
what it takes. And I don't think
we can take
a risk on a loose cannon like
Donald Trump
running our country.
JOHN YANG: Already launching a
general election
campaign, while still working to
secure her
own nomination.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will
explore the new
lay of the land on both sides of
the presidential
race after the news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: A
wildfire burned its way into
Canada's main
oil sands city and forced almost
90,000 people
to flee. Everyone was ordered
out of Fort
McMurray, Alberta, and the
province declared
a state of emergency. The fire
has raged across
tinder-dry woodlands and
consumed entire suburbs.
Many people headed south. Others
sheltered
in nearby camps, and some
criticized the way
it was handled.
JOAN BATES, Resident: Well, it's
a disaster,
and I find that it is not fair.
They didn't
even let us take our things when
we asked
them, so we lost everything now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Prime Minister
Justin Trudeau
said today the country's
military stands ready
to help if needed.
HARI SREENIVASAN: From fire to
water, President
Obama made a long-awaited visit
to Flint,
Michigan today, where the
drinking water has
been contaminated with lead.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The president
was greeted
by gray skies and a line of
Michigan officials,
including Republican Governor
Rick Snyder
and Flint Mayor Karen Weaver. He
urged parents
in Flint to have their kids
tested for lead
exposure and to use filters on
their tap water.
Then, he took a drink himself.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Generally, I have not been doing
stunts here,
but -- and this used a filter.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: His visit was
prompted in
part by a letter from Mari
Copeny, an 8-year-old
girl in Flint.
MARI COPENY, Flint Resident: I
am one of the
children that is affected by
this water, and
I have been doing my best to
march in protest
and speak out for all the kids
that live here
in Flint.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Known as
Little Miss Flint,
she and other residents had the
chance to
meet with the president today.
BARACK OBAMA: You should be
angry, but channel
that anger. You should be hurt,
but don't
sink into despair. And most of
all, do not
somehow communicate to our
children here in
this city that they're going to
be saddled
with problems for the rest of
their lives,
because they will not. They will
do just fine.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All of this
comes two years
after the city's water source
was switched
to the Flint River to save
money. After months
of complaints of tainted water,
officials
acknowledged the river water
wasn't treated
properly and had leached lead
from old pipes
into people's water supply.
The city has stopped using the
river, and
lead levels are gradually
falling. But questions
persist about who knew what and
when about
the lead contamination.
Julie Mack is a reporter at
Michigan-Live,
a state newspaper consortium.
She was part
of an investigative team looking
into e-mails
and documents from Governor
Snyder and his
inner circle.
Julie Mack, MLive.Com: There was
something
obviously seriously wrong with
the water.
People are coming to showing off
jugs of brown
water for a year, you know, 17
months, before
they did anything. And that
remains a puzzle
of, why did it take so long for
there to be
action?
(BOOING)
GOV. RICK SNYDER (R), Michigan:
Good afternoon.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Snyder himself
was heckled
and booed today at his speech in
Flint, and
he apologized again, saying --
quote -- "Your
government failed you."
Looking ahead, the mayor of
Flint estimates
it will cost $55 million to
remove and replace
Flint's old lead pipes. The
Michigan legislature
has approved $67 million since
October, but,
so far, the money has been slow
to reach residents.
A congressional package of $100
million for
the water system and $50 million
for health
care needs associated with lead
poisoning
is still awaiting action.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. Justice
Department
warned North Carolina today not
to enforce
a new LGBT law. The statute
limits protections
for gays, lesbians, bisexual and
transgender
people. The Justice Department
said it violates
federal civil rights laws. The
department
notified Republican Governor Pat
McCrory that
the state could lose hundreds of
millions
of dollars in federal funding.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The biggest
automotive recall
in U.S. history will get even
bigger. Japan's
Takata Corporation is adding up
to 40 million
additional air bag inflators on
top of almost
30 million already recalled. In
some cases,
the devices can fire metal
shards when they
go off. But federal regulators
acknowledged
today that replacing all of them
is a huge
job.
MARK ROSEKIND, Administrator,
National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration:
There is already
concern about supply being
available. Part
of the issue here is to make
sure we accelerate
and as quickly as possible get
the replacements,
but we do not want to introduce
new safety
risks by pushing too fast too
hard.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Takata air
bags have
been linked to at least 11
deaths.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Syria, the
government and
moderate rebel factions have
agreed to restore
a fragile cease-fire in Aleppo,
after days
of fierce fighting. The U.S. and
Russia worked
out the agreement, on the heels
of similar
deals in Damascus and Latakia
province. The
Syrian military said later that
the Aleppo
truce is good for only 48 hours.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The global
tobacco industry
was dealt a double blow today.
The European
Union's highest court upheld
requirements
that cigarettes be sold in plain
packages.
The rules also limit advertising
for e-cigarettes.
Separately, India's Supreme
Court ordered
that health warnings cover 85
percent of a
cigarette pack's surface.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, the federal
Transportation Security
Administration is
moving to address long lines at
the busiest
U.S. airports.
Officials said today they're
adding more screeners
and bomb-sniffing dogs to
expedite screening.
Airlines have voiced concerns
that growing
wait times will affect the peak
summer travel
season.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And on Wall
Street, stocks
sagged after a private survey of
job creation
turned in disappointing numbers.
The Dow Jones
industrial average lost 99
points to close
at 17651. The Nasdaq fell 37
points, and the
S&P 500 slipped 12.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
will the
GOP finally rally around Donald
Trump? We
get takes from political
reporters and former
presidential candidate Ben
Carson; the U.S.
role in fighting ISIS under fire
after a Navy
seal is killed in Iraq; why half
of all teenagers
say they're addicted to their
phones; and
much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On this day with
more than
its share of political tumult,
the questions
abound. How exactly did Donald
Trump upend
the Republican Party to become
its presumptive
nominee for president? And how
does Bernie
Sanders' decision to stay in the
race affect
Hillary Clinton?
For some answers, we turn to
Susan Page, Washington
bureau chief for USA Today, and
Karen Tumulty,
national political correspondent
for The Washington
Post.
And welcome to both of you.
So, I think it's fair to say
that, a year
ago, hardly anybody thought
Donald Trump would
have sewn up his party's
nomination by now,
Susan, much less before Hillary
Clinton sews
up hers. How did he do it?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
You know, he didn't have the
best campaign
organization. He didn't have
experienced people
around him. He didn't have the
best pollster,
the best ads. He didn't spend
the most money.
He had a message. He had a
message and an
understanding of the mood of the
part of the
American electorate that almost
no one else
did, at how angry and frustrated
and how much
a desire of a different kind of
politics -- that
group of Republicans in these
primaries, the
kind of politics they were ready
to embrace.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karen, what would
you add?
KAREN TUMULTY, The Washington
Post: Well,
I think not only did he have
that. He had
it early.
The fact is, Donald Trump, six
days after
the 2012 election, filed the
paperwork to
trademark the phrase that would
become the
signature of his campaign, which
is "Make
America great again." He not
only had a sense
of the electorate, but he had it
early, and
he had it at a time when the
Republican Party
elders thought that there -- you
know, that
what they needed to be doing was
sort of softening
the edges of the party, you
know, appealing
to women and Hispanics and young
people.
Donald Trump sensed that what
would win this
primary race was exactly the
opposite.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, here we are
now. He's sewn
it up. All day long, I think, we
have been
watching a parade of
Republicans, conservatives
either saying never Donald
Trump, they're
not going to go with him, Susan,
or some of
them gradually falling in line.
How serious opposition -- is the
opposition
that he faces in his own party?
SUSAN PAGE: I think the
opposition is not
serious in terms of getting the
nomination.
I think that battle is over, and
he is now
the face of the Republican
Party.
But you do see some fervent
supporters, most
of them not really elected
senior Republicans,
mostly in the electorate. You
see a couple
of people saying they won't vote
for him.
But you know the favorite line
of the Republicans
who are running for the Senate
this year is
that I'm going to summit the
nominee, without
saying Donald Trump's name.
Now, this is a distinction that
I think Democratic
ad makers, Democratic opponents
aren't going
to recognize. But it's an effort
to not break
with the party, and yet not get
too close
to Donald Trump, because while
he succeeded
in winning this nomination, he
is at odds
with the kind of coalition that
we think you
need to have to actually win the
presidency.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karen, you
actually interviewed
Donald Trump last night as the
results from
Indiana were coming in. What are
the challenges
that he faces now heading into
this general
election?
KAREN TUMULTY: Well, I think
that the challenges
are going to be presenting
himself to an electorate
that goes beyond the most
fervent conservative
-- most fervent grassroots
Republicans.
It is going to be transforming
himself into
something and somebody who the
broader swathe
of the electorate can actually
imagine in
the Oval Office. The other
thing, and what
he told me in the interview, he
has decided
that what he has to do is make
Hillary Clinton
unacceptable to them.
And he plans to do that, he told
me, not by
focusing on her ideas and what
she would do
for the country, but rather her
past, that
he thinks that that is a lot of
fertile territory.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Susan, how
does she counterñ
that? She said in an interview
today on CNN
she views him as a loose cannon.
She used
that term over and over again.
What are we
looking at?
SUSAN PAGE: So, we're looking at
two candidates
who are each going to spend
their time talking
about the how terrible the other
one is, right?
This is what I think you do in
an election
where both candidates have
negative ratings
of above 50 percent. There's
limits to how
much they can persuade people
that they're
the optimistic candidate of the
future they
ought to embrace. But they need
to make the
case that the other guy is
simply unacceptable,
so Donald Trump talking about
Hillary Clinton
that way.
Hillary Clinton describing
Donald Trump as
not an acceptable commander in
chief, I think
that's a particular theme we're
going to see
her hit over and over again, and
someone who
doesn't have the temperament you
need to be
president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, meantime,
Karen, Hillary
Clinton still faces a challenger
in her own
party. Bernie Sanders, as we
know, won the
Indiana primary. He's likely or
expected to
win some of the primaries coming
up between
now and the convention.
How much of -- how does that
affect Hillary
Clinton's path from now until
the convention
in Philadelphia?
KAREN TUMULTY: You know, it
probably doesn't
affect her chances of winning
the nomination.
What it could affect -- and this
ball is very
much in Bernie Sanders' court --
what it could
affect is how enthusiastic
Bernie Sanders'
supporters are about supporting
her, about
turning up and voting for her in
the fall.
And this is a choice as -- you
know, the Clinton
campaign has said but it's a
real choice as
to, you know, what kind of tone
he takes for
the remainder of the primary,
whether it's
talking about his ideas and how
he wants to
shape the Democratic agenda or
whether it
is beating up on the most likely
nominee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
that Democratic
contest, Susan?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, you know, I
think it's a
constant reminder of some of
Hillary Clinton's
weaknesses to have Bernie
Sanders not only
out there running, but beating
her in primaries,
as he did last night.
And it prevents her from doing
what we traditionally
see candidates do, which is move
a little
bit to the middle after securing
their party's
nomination. She is, I think, not
able to do
that. She needs to stay -- she's
been pulled
a little bit to the left, tugged
to left by
him, particularly, say, on the
issue of trade.
It's going to keep her there.
And that's a
battle that I think we will see
fought out
over the platform when you come
to the Democratic
Convention in July.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, meantime,
Karen, still,
so much attention on Donald
Trump and what
he has been able to pull off and
what he needs
to do.
From your conversation with him,
what kind
of sense did you get of how he
sees his own
challenge in the next months --
in the months
to come?
KAREN TUMULTY: You know, he --
he sounded
pretty happy with the kind of
campaign he
has run, and seems to believe
that he can
continue to do that.
I think, however, that a general
election
campaign is going to require a
different kind
of campaign operation. A lot of
people are
worried that he may not have the
-- because
he's been self-funding, he may
not have the
fund-raising capacity that he
will need to
go into what one -- one --
Stuart Stevens,
Mitt Romney's former strategist,
described
to me as a billion-dollar buzz
saw that the
Democrats are preparing for him.
Trump points out, well, they
have spent all
this money already in the
Republican primary,
and it didn't do a thing to me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, just
quickly, Susan,
a lot of people think, well, he
is a billionaire.
He can pay his own way.
But it's not that simple.
SUSAN PAGE: It's not.
And look at how carefully the
Clinton people
are pursuing this. You know
where Hillary
Clinton was last night? She was
in Ohio. That
is going to be a swing state.
They are already
laying the groundwork there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan Page, Karen
Tumulty,
we thank you both.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
KAREN TUMULTY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And there's more
to come. We
will be back a little later in
the program
to talk with
Trump-rival-turned-supporter
Dr. Ben Carson.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There were
more details
today about the death of Navy
SEAL Charles
Keating in a firefight yesterday
with ISIS
militants in Northern Iraq.
The U.S. has moved in more
troops and materiel
recently to support Iraqi
military efforts
against the group. At the same
time, there
is political turmoil in Baghdad,
where the
government of Prime Minister
Haider al-Abadi
is facing challenges from rival
Shia groups.
For more, I'm joined now by The
Washington
Post's Baghdad bureau chief,
Loveday Morris.
She just returned from the front
lines in
Northern Iraq.
Loveday Morris, thanks for
joining us.
You were near the front lines of
this battle.
Describe the situation there.
What did you
see?
LOVEDAY MORRIS, The Washington
Post: What
we are seeing on the front lines
at the moment
is an increased U.S. troop
presence outside
of the more established Iraqi
bases.
The line where I was at, south
of Mosul, now
there's a U.S. artillery base
which is relatively
close to the front lines. And
the problem
with these front lines are that,
that scrappy
line, you have suicide bombers
penetrating
the lines regularly.
So, as we see more troops, more
U.S. troops
coming, there were more
announced by the president,
there is an increased risk for
them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What do you
know now about
how this SEAL died?
LOVEDAY MORRIS: What the
Pentagon is saying
that, at around 7:30 a.m., a
large-scale ISIS
attack broke through the Kurdish
Peshmerga
at the line.
These Navy SEALs, they came as a
part of a
rapid reaction force, and this
SEAL sadly
died while trying to assist
them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yesterday, the
secretary
of defense said that this was a
combat death.
But then the White House said
this soldier
wasn't on a combat mission.
How would you describe what U.S.
forces are
doing on the ground in Iraq?
LOVEDAY MORRIS: I think a lot of
people are
confused, and I can see why.
The problem is, if you have U.S.
forces dotted
along front lines that are
scrappy front lines,
and getting entangled when there
are ISIS
attacks, calling for assistance,
and then
becoming involved in firefights,
I mean, is
that -- do you clock that as
combat, or do
you clock that as advise and
assist?
The Iraqis that were around --
we talked to
a lot of Iraqis that were around
when this
incident happened actually on
Tuesday, and
they actually seemed to be under
the impression
that these SEALs were assisting
them take
back the town. They seemed to
think that they
were part of a counteroffensive
to take back
the town.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We have seen
quite a bit
of protests and demonstrations
against the
Iraqi government, due to
corruption and lack
of services.
What's the political situation
like, and how
is that affecting what's
happening on the
battlefield?
LOVEDAY MORRIS: At the moment,
the political
situation is a big worry.
There's a worry that it's going
to delay plans
for any Mosul offensive. The
prime minister,
Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi,
he is the
commander in chief of the armed
forces. He's
America's main partner when it
comes to fighting
ISIS on the ground in Iraq.
His position is in question.
He's fighting
for his political survival.
Everyone's very
worried about the potential for
a political
vacuum. That would have a huge
impact on the
U.S.' campaign. They're here at
the invitation
of the Iraqi government. What
happens if you
have a power vacuum here? It's
definitely
a big concern for them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Loveday Morris
of The Washington
Post, joining us via Skype from
Baghdad, thanks
so much.
LOVEDAY MORRIS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
shocking number
of deaths attributed to
preventable medical
errors; the life of James Brown,
a metaphor
for our struggle with race and
class; and
But, first, a new report looks
at how digital
devices are taking a toll on
kids and families.
The report issued yesterday by
Common Sense
Media found half of all young
people feel
they are addicted to their
devices. Almost
60 percent of adults think their
kids are
addicted too. And a third of
parents and teens
say that they argue daily about
screen time.
Now a new documentary explores
this topic
and offers ideas about what
families can do
to navigate these waters.
William Brangham is back with
our look.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
documentary is called
"Screenagers," and, in it, Dr.
Delaney Ruston
explores the complex
relationship teenagers
have with their screens, both
the pleasures
they take in sharing their lives
online with
their friends, as well as the
darker side,
those who lose control of their
digital habits,
and spiral into damaging
behavior.
WOMAN: When I went to hug him, I
could feel
the bones in his back. And that
was scary.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The film also
looks at the
latest research about the impact
all this
screen time has on the brains of
young people.
SHERRY TURKLE, Massachusetts
Institute of
Technology: You have a brain
that is wired
for what in psychology is called
seeking behavior,
the kind of thing that a Google
search gives
you, something new, something
stimulating,
something different.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Throughout the
film, Ruston
also turns the camera on
herself, exploring
the real and all-too-common
conflicts that
flare up as she and her family
haggle over
screen time.
DR. DELANEY RUSTON, Filmmaker,
"Screenagers":
What should the rules be?
Because we don't
have any right now.
TESSA, Daughter: I think the
rules should
be there is no rule. It's not
like I'm on
it 24/7.
DR. DELANEY RUSTON: When you
have it, you're
always checking it. And I --
don't you think
that...
TESSA: Well, if you put this in
front of me,
yes, I will go on it, and, yes,
I can find
something to do on it.
DR. DELANEY RUSTON: Tessa, why
are you so
mad? OK. Just get dressed. I'm
sorry you're
crying.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I met with
Delaney Ruston
last week in Washington, D.C.
I wonder, what was that --
initially, what
made you want to do this film?
DR. DELANEY RUSTON: Well, I was
having a really
hard time as a mom with my two
kids. You know,
my son wanted to play video
games a lot and
my daughter really wanted more
and more social
media, and I felt completely out
of control.
And, as a doctor, I was
thinking, what is
the impact of all this screen
time? I knew,
as a mom, that, every day, there
was tension
in the house, and I felt
completely out of
control on what to do, what kind
of limits
to set, how this was affecting
them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Now that you
have done all
this research, what was it, I'm
curious, that
most surprised you that you
found?
DR. DELANEY RUSTON: Well, I
think one thing
that really helped me to start
to be a better
parent around this is to learn
that the dopamine
that's secreted in the brain's
pleasure center
when we get new bits of
information and we
look at the screens, that center
of the brain
is most activated when we're
kids and we're
teenagers.
So, knowing that they are so
pulled into these
in a way that we can't even
understand has
made me not be as angry at them,
but realize
there's a lot more I need to do
as -- in my
parenting.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, these are
little electronic
drug delivery devices? I know
that's a crude
way to put it, but that's what
you're saying.
DR. DELANEY RUSTON: Absolutely.
I mean, it's amazing that
there's many studies
that look at MRI scans of the
brain of kids
who play a lot of video games,
20 hours or
more of video games a week. And
when they
compare them to people who are
addicted to,
say, drugs or alcohol, their
brains scans
are similar. So, something is
really happening
on a physiological level. It's
not just psychological.
MAN: We exposed young mice to
switching sounds
and light.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In the film,
Ruston talks
with researchers who are
studying what multitasking,
switching rapidly back and forth
between digital
devices, does to the brain
function of mice.
MAN: Afterwards, we looked at
the effect on
learning and found that the
ability of these
young mice to learn new things
was very much
compromised.
It took them three times longer
or more to
learn how to go through a maze
than the non-exposed
young mice. We are exposing a
whole generation
of children to this rapid-paced
media, and
we have no clue what it does to
the brain.
And if it's the same as we see
in the mice,
then this is very shocking news.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean, does
that kind of
stuff terrify you? Or do you
think this research
is not necessarily analogous? I
mean, how
are people supposed to process
this information?
DR. DELANEY RUSTON: You know, I
think it's
a question about how much we're
giving kids
full potential in everything
that they do.
And, to me, a big issue is how
much time they
have with all sorts of skills
that they're
learning offline, social
engagement, competency,
talking to people face to face.
So, I think, if we're giving
them a lot of
those situations, that even if
there's some
concern about attention span and
possibly
some changes in the brain, I
think that humans
are resilient enough -- and
already we're
seeing that people are not, you
know, dropping
like flies from screen time. I
don't think
we're at that place yet where we
need to be
really alarmist.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's say I'm
a parent and
I come to you and I say, I have
a young kid,
maybe a 10-year-old daughter.
When should
I get her a phone? What would
you tell this
parent?
DR. DELANEY RUSTON: I think, you
know, obviously,
every kid is different, and
that's really
important. And every situation
in the home
is different.
But I do worry that it is
getting younger
and younger. And when we bring
them -- start
having them in elementary
school, we have
to wonder, when is it too young
that they're
not going to be able to resist
the impulse
to check or to post?
MAN: Every girl in the picture
is locked into
her phone. Peralta knocks it
into center.
David tonight 2-2, a leadoff
single here in
the fourth, and nobody noticed.
We need to -- can we do an
intervention?
DR. DELANEY RUSTON: This is all
about teaching
kids self-control, and what we
have learned
through the research is that
it's absolutely
teachable. So, I would really
discourage a
family from getting a child a
device when
they don't feel like they are
going to be
able to control themselves from
when they
use it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Ruston has
been taking her
film across the country
recently, holding
screenings in dozens of cities,
encouraging
parents and kids to come, to
watch, and to
then continue the conversation
at home.
DR. DELANEY RUSTON: You know
what I think
is really exciting, is that kids
and teenagers
actually want to talk about
these issues.
And I think that it doesn't take
that long
in homeroom or in some other
setting to ask
these questions about, what are
you struggling
with, with your screen time, or
what do you
see happening on social media?
And once we
say we want to hear from you,
then they care,
as opposed to what I see so
often is this
message of zero tolerance, let's
just take
everything away and get mad at
you.
That's not going to get kids to
open up and
feel comfortable to be a part of
this, and
that's really what this is going
to take.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For the "PBS
NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham in
Washington, D.C.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For the better
part of two
decades, there's been a growing
recognition
that medical errors kill too
many patients
in the U.S.
While exact numbers are elusive,
a new analysis
and estimate portrays an even
grimmer picture.
The new paper finds that as many
as 250,000
people die each year from errors
in hospitals
and other health care
facilities. That would
make it the third leading cause
of death in
the U.S., ahead of respiratory
disease, accidents
and even stroke.
Dr. Martin Makary, a professor
of surgery
at the Johns Hopkins University
School of
Medicine who led the research,
joins me now.
So, how did we get to this
number? What did
your research find?
DR. MARTIN MAKARY, Professor of
Surgery, Johns
Hopkins University School of
Medicine: Well,
we took the best available
studies, the data
from the medical literature, and
we basically
came up with a meta-analysis
point estimate,
and then asked, where would that
fall if medical
error were counted as a disease?
It turns out that we learned
that the CDC
doesn't consider medical error
to be a cause
of death in listing our national
health statistics
each year, even though the point
estimate
comes right in between number
two and number
three on the list, which means
medical error
is the number three cause of
death in the
United States. We're just not
measuring it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK. So, let's
talk a little
bit about the methodology.
If the numbers are scarce, are
these studies
representative enough sample
sets to be able
to extrapolate this
quarter-million?
DR. MARTIN MAKARY: These are
studies of hundreds
of thousands of hospitalizations
in the top
medical journals. And they are
updating the
1999 Institute of Medicine
report.
And there's broad consensus that
the range
is somewhere between 200,000 and
400,000.
Our analysis came up with
251,000. No matter
what number you pick, it is well
above the
currently listed number three
cause of death.
And it turns out that the reason
it's not
being counted is that the system
relies on
billing codes to compile our
national health
statistics.
But people don't always die of a
billing code.
They can die from diagnostic
errors, fragmented
care, preventable complications.
These are
not things that are captured in
national health
statistics. That list of most
common causes
of death in the United States,
that list is
a big deal.
It informs all of our research
funding priorities
as a country, all of our public
health campaigns.
We spend a lot of time and money
on heart
disease and cancer, but we
haven't even really
recognized that the third
leading burden on
health in America in terms of
death is medical
error in its many forms.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, how do
systems change
to try to adapt for this? I
remember there
was a book written a while ago
about the checklist,
and actually preventing surgical
errors just
by something as simple as that.
Are there systemic improvements
that we can
make to try to decrease this
error rate?
DR. MARTIN MAKARY: Well, there
are so many
great homegrown ideas by doctors
around the
country, hospital associations,
national collaboratives.
But the important work that
they're doing
is vastly underfunded and
underappreciated.
Our large research center in
patient safety
at Johns Hopkins has applied for
numerous
federal grants, and we keep
getting message
back, this is not within the
scope of the
NIH. This is not within the
scope of the National
Cancer Institute.
And all of these grants are
relegated to a
very small agency with a
fraction of the budget,
$300 million for the entire
agency, including
the grants. If you look at the
number of people
that die from breast cancer,
it's about a
fourth or a fifth of the number
of people
that die from medical care gone
wrong.
And yet they have billions more
because of
the great lobbying efforts and
the vocal advocacy
work of that group. Well, it
turns out that
it's not proportional to the
burden of preventable
health in America.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How do you
capture the number
of people who might not be
killed by a medical
error, but might be with some
serious negative
health outcomes when they leave
the hospital?
DR. MARTIN MAKARY: Well, studies
in -- even
in "The New England Journal of
Medicine" show
that as many as one in four
patients in the
hospital will have some medical
error that
they experience, almost always
nonconsequential.
And it's estimated that about
half of 1 percent
to a little more than 1 percent
of these errors
could actually be fatal. If you
extrapolate
the numbers to all U.S.
hospitalization, that's
where this 250,000 estimate
comes from. That's
not even counting people that
die at home
or sometimes through limited
insurance networks
or cracks in the system that
result in deaths.
It doesn't include outpatient
office deaths
or ambulatory surgery deaths.
So, we think
that the estimate is a solid
estimate. There's
broad consensus in the field.
It's in that
range. And it doesn't even
include a lot of
other types of medical errors
that lead to
death.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, so
I'm a patient.
How do I figure out the hospital
I might be
taken to or that I'm already in
is kind of
the lowest that it can be on
these error rates?
Or what do I do to inform
myself? What kind
of questions do I ask a doctor
or a hospital
about my care?
DR. MARTIN MAKARY: Well, on a
national level,
this is exactly why we need to
measure the
problem.
On a bedside level, you should
always go into
your office visit or your
hospitalization
with a loved one or family
member. They're
an important safety net. And,
certainly, patients
that we see that come in with
that support
system are often critical in
coordinating
care.
Also, ask about a second
opinion. If you're
going to have something major,
like an operation
or start a medication,
sometimes, it's worth
getting a second opinion,
because about 20
percent of second opinions are
different than
the first opinion. So, it's good
to know all
the treatment options, be
well-read, and come
in with a loved one.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Dr.
Martin Makary
of Johns Hopkins, thanks so
much.
DR. MARTIN MAKARY: Great to be
with you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We return to the
presidential
race now and to a man who once
challenged
Donald Trump, but now supports
him, Dr. Ben
Carson.
Today, it was announced that he
will assist
the Trump campaign in selecting
a running
mate.
For the record, I knew Dr.
Carson before he
was a candidate, when he was a
doctor for
one of my children.
And he joins me now from Palm
Beach Gardens,
Florida.
Welcome back to the "NewsHour,"
Dr. Carson.
Now that Donald Trump has sewn
up this nomination,
what do you expect from him? Do
you think
he will change the message he's
been giving
to the American people, change
his presentation,
or do you think it will stay the
same?
DR. BEN CARSON (R), Former
Presidential Candidate:
Well, you know, getting to the
process of
gaining the nomination involves
a mud-fight.
So, that's been largely taken
care of. And
now you can turn your focus a
little bit more
to some of the issues and some
of the innovative
solutions that really haven't
been talked
about before, and really trying
stabilize
the economic situation of our
country.
And I think you're going to see
a lot of pivoting
there. That doesn't mean there
won't be some
more mud-fighting when the
actual election
comes up with Hillary Clinton.
But, right
now, I think you're going to see
a little
bit different.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you expect to
see him take
a position or positions that
will surprise
the American people?
DR. BEN CARSON: I think people
will be very
pleasantly surprised by what he
really has
an opportunity to explain,
because many have
said, oh, he doesn't have any
understanding
of foreign policy, doesn't
really, truly understand
how the system works. I think
they will be
surprised at that.
I think people will also be
surprised at some
of the individuals who will be
selected for
different positions. They will
be, I think,
very pleasantly surprised when
they see the
list of Supreme Court
possibilities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As you know, a
number of prominent
Republicans are saying -- yes,
some are saying
they will support him, but there
are a number
of prominent Republicans saying
they will
never support him.
We heard again today from the
Senator from
Nebraska Ben Sasse. He said --
he said: I
stick with my view that I have
expressed before
that Donald Trump is a
destructive force bent
on dividing the country.
Does Donald Trump try to change
the minds
of people like Senator Sasse, or
does he just
move on?
DR. BEN CARSON: Well, you know,
early on,
you will hear a lot of that, as
you have always
heard when there's controversy
in a selection.
Over the course of time, that
tends to melt
away as people begin to consider
the alternative.
Now, there may be some
Republicans who, you
know, prefer a more progressive
ideology,
prefer, you know, more debt,
prefer withdrawal
from the world and allowing our
enemies to
multiply and destruction of our
military.
And those people probably should
-- should
move on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think it's
significant,
Dr. Carson, that both former
Presidents George
H.W. Bush and George W. Bush are
saying today
that they don't plan to get
involved in this
election, they don't plan to
express their
view one way or another?
In other words, they're not
going to get behind
this candidacy, they're saying.
DR. BEN CARSON: Well, again, we
must recognize
that, you know, what Donald
Trump represents
is really quite alien to the
traditional political
system, Democrats or
Republicans. You know,
they're used to having people
who are part
of the system, who have
obligations to this
group or this group.
To have somebody who is
completely uncontrollable
is a very difficult thing for
the system to
adjust to. But, hopefully, they
will. The
people have adjusted to it. And
the people
have decided that they will
supersede the
system and vote in such numbers
that it wouldn't
be thrown into a contested
situation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, of course,
you're referring
to some or most of those who
vote in these
Republican primaries.
I know you're familiar with the
polls, Dr.
Carson, that show Donald Trump
has a problem
with different groups of voters,
Hispanics,
African-Americans, women. How
does he begin
to win those important parts of
the electorate
over?
DR. BEN CARSON: Well, I think
he's going to
begin to address those,
certainly going to
begin talking about the kinds of
programs
that provide ladders of
opportunity that will
give a person the ability to
climb out of
a state of dependency, utilizing
their own
God-given talents and strengths
and hard work.
And we will do things to try to
facilitate
that. We will be talking about
how we can
make education more widely
available. And
I'm talking about good
education. You look
at our inner cities, you look at
some of those
high schools, we have more than
50 percent
of people dropping out, not
because they don't
want to be educated, but because
they're not
being educated, and they say,
what's the point
in being here?
We have to change that, because
we need all
of those people. We only have
330 million
people. We have to compete
against China with
1.3 or 1.4 billion. We can't
afford to lose
any of our people. We need to
start talking
about, you know, our justice
system and how
we prevent such an influx of
people, because
we can't afford to be losing all
these people.
This is great talent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I saw another
comment today,
this one from the former
governor of Utah,
Republican Mike Leavitt. He
said, "Donald
Trump is going to have to
demonstrate he has
the temperament to be
president."
How does Donald Trump do that?
DR. BEN CARSON: I think he --
you know, we
all have our weaknesses. There's
no question
about that.
And, you know, he has sometimes
had a little
difficulty letting something go
when somebody
insults him. But I think he
realizes that
this will be a trick that his
opponents will
use to try to get him off track.
And I think
he's much smarter than people
think. And he's
just not going to fall for that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, you
mentioned Supreme
Court names. Glad to have you
share any of
those with us.
And, also, as I mentioned, he
said that -- Donald
Trump said you're going to be on
the committee
looking at a possible running
mate. Are you
interested in that position
yourself?
DR. BEN CARSON: I prefer to work
from the
outside.
And I also recognize that myself
as a running
mate would just start the
feeding frenzy again
on behalf of some of the media
who just couldn't
stand the thought of me doing
anything. Rather
than become a distraction in
that sense, you
know, I would rather help from
the outside.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And are there
some names of
individuals you think would make
a good running
mate for him? Do you have people
in mind?
DR. BEN CARSON: I think there's
a whole host
of terrific people.
And, you know, I would rather
allow, you know,
Donald Trump himself to reveal
those names.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're going
to be working
closely with him during this
campaign, during
the remainder of this campaign?
DR. BEN CARSON: We will be
working during
the campaign to do everything we
possibly
can.
You know, my goal is to make
sure that we
have a thriving and vibrant
America for the
next generation. You know, my
whole life has
been about children and making
things better
for them. And that's not going
to happen unless
we fix the economy and create a
safe environment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dr. Ben Carson,
we thank you
for joining us.
DR. BEN CARSON: Thank you so
much, Judy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now a new look
at the hardest
working man in show business, a
man of many
contradictions, highs and lows,
whose musical
legacy opened doors and
influenced black and
white musicians alike.
Jeffrey Brown has this newest
addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: He was the
Godfather of Soul,
an incredible entertainer, by
any measure
one of the most important and
influential
American musicians of the 20th
century.
But who was James Brown, the
man, and what
shaped him? Those questions are
taken up by
musician and writer James
McBride, best known
for his memoir "The Color of
Water" and his
National Book Award-winning
novel "The Good
Lord Bird."
McBride's new book is "Kill 'Em
and Leave:
Searching for James Brown and
the American
Soul."
We talked recently at the Howard
Theatre in
Washington, D.C., AN historic
hall where James
Brown regularly performed.
And I asked first about the
power of Brown's
music.
JAMES MCBRIDE, Author, "Kill 'Em
and Leave:
Searching for James Brown and
the American
Soul": Well, there's no music in
America that
you can listen to that doesn't
have some James
Brown in it.
I mean, the whole creation of
the synthesizers
and these guitar parts and the
beat, that
was James Brown. Elvis Presley
shook America
up, and James Brown shook the
world up, because
his whole persona was that of
someone whose
consumed by this music, this
sound.
So, he was a phenomena. And he
was really
seen as a kind of a scream at
the end of the
dial, where black radio lived.
JEFFREY BROWN: A scream at the
end of the
dial? Yes.
JAMES MCBRIDE: Yes, he was this
-- he was
-- because everyone knows, "Wo,
I feel good."
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. Yes.
JAMES MCBRIDE: But, musically,
he was very
sophisticated. There is a lot of
counterpoint
in James Brown's music.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is not a
traditional biography,
though, that you have written,
right? The
subtitle says tell us that is
searching for
the American soul. And that
means taking us
to some deep places.
JAMES MCBRIDE: Well, yes.
Well, I think James Brown's life
is a metaphor
really for how America has
evolved. And it
is a metaphor for how we can't
talk about
the business of race and class
and North and
South, because, in many ways,
James Brown
was much more a Southerner than
he was a black
man. Everything about the...
JEFFREY BROWN: And what does
that mean?
JAMES MCBRIDE: Well, everything
about the
way he lived, everything about
his lifestyle
and his choices, personal and
professional
choices, were dictated by the
decorum and
the pride and the honor and
integrity of Southern
life.
So, you know the whole business
of him doing
his hair, for example, and
always being proper,
and not showing his pain, the
whole business
of trust in the South, and
especially in James
Brown's world, and you talk to
Southerners,
this -- this whole mentality of,
if we trust
you, we will trust you with our
life, but
if you betray that trust, our
journey is over.
And James Brown really typified
that in many
ways.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you also talk
about the
idea of putting on a face,
right, not presenting
your true self, partly out of
fear as a black
man in the South.
JAMES MCBRIDE: Well, that's
right. He had
a lot of fear of white people as
well, because
he grew up in a segregated part
of the world,
and he grew up in a world where
there was
a lot of cruelty, in a world
where everyone
had to stay in their own lane.
And I think his fear of white
people and his
fear of being broke and his fear
of people
trying to -- taking what he had,
including
the government and the IRS,
which cleaned
him to the walls twice, made him
a very lonely
and fearful person.
But he never showed that to
people. His face
was that of bravado and pride
and smiling.
He never wanted to show -- he
didn't want
people to know him.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, that comes
through. Right?
I mean, he's a very hard man to
know, even
by those you talked to who were
very close
to him.
JAMES MCBRIDE: Well, you know,
he compartmentalized
people.
You know, he had his black
friends. He had
his white friends. He had his
manager that
he trusted with his money, and
his accountant
that he trusted with his money.
And he had
this promoter that he trusted
and that one
he didn't.
He lived in a world of many
rooms. I don't
know if he is that different
from any of us.
But he is an exaggeration of all
of us, because
he doesn't know how to quite
function comfortably
in any one place.
JEFFREY BROWN: And what about
the way he was
treated, seen? I mean, you are
talking about
him rocking the universe. Elvis
Presley, though,
of course, gets much more -- got
much more
attention.
JAMES MCBRIDE: Of course.
Well, I mean, listen, the whole
business of
the evolution of black music in
America is
a difficult subject to talk
about without
sounding like a racist
malcontent. But I have
spent most...
JEFFREY BROWN: But you have made
it part of
the story here of James Brown.
JAMES MCBRIDE: I had to. You
can't avoid it.
It is like -- it's the elephant
in the room.
I mean, most black musicians,
including James
Brown, walked through department
stores and
hear ninth chords borrowing from
their history.
There is no pension for the guys
who created...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: You mean the
Muzak, the music
in the...
(CROSSTALK)
JAMES MCBRIDE: Yes, the music --
the music
that plays into the...
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. Yes.
JAMES MCBRIDE: They hear their
own music piped
back to them, as they're living
lives of relative
poverty and anonymity.
And, I mean, history has gobbled
up most black
musicians' contributions. I
never thought
it would eat James Brown alive,
but it has
to some degree.
JEFFREY BROWN: So did he ever
get his proper
due?
JAMES MCBRIDE: I don't think
he's gotten his
just due, because I don't think
he has seen
-- he is such a phenomena, that
people remember
him and they just remember he
just gave them
such a good time.
They forget that, musically, he
was brilliant,
and that, personally, despite
his personal
struggles, which were painful to
him and to
others, that he put that aside
in order to
try to make people happy, and to
try to make
people, most importantly, get
along.
JEFFREY BROWN: Was it an easy
story to tell?
Was he an easy man to find in
the end?
JAMES MCBRIDE: No, this was the
hardest book
I have ever done, because even
after finishing
this book, I don't really feel I
know him
completely.
I don't think he wanted to --
it's clear he
didn't want to be known. But I
have enough
of the ghost of the man, the nub
of the man,
to tell the story in a way that
I think people
would relate to.
It is hard to know someone who
spent his entire
life not wanting to be known.
Michael Jackson
was the same way. In fact, a lot
of the celebrities
are the same way. They have this
penchant
for privacy because they don't
want to show
you the pain that powers them.
But the story -- you know, the
story is the
pain that powers them. That's
the fuel. That
is the motor in the car. And so
-- and dissecting
that with James Brown, you
realize that a
lot of what motored him along
was his desire
for people to see beyond the
color of his
skin. And that is something we
still have
a hard time working out in this
country.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
book is "Kill
'Em and Leave: Searching for
James Brown and
the American Soul."
James McBride, thank you.
JAMES MCBRIDE: Thank you very
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Tens of thousands of online
readers have
taken political scientist
Charles Murray's
bubble quiz, in order to see how
culturally
isolated they are from
mainstream Americans.
The problem, according to
economist Gerald
Jaynes, so-called mainstream
America doesn't
actually exist. You can read his
full critique
on Making Sense.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And again to
our honor roll
of American service personnel
killed in the
Afghanistan conflict. We add
them as their
deaths are made official and
photographs become
available. Here, in silence, are
two more.
Tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose": a
look at New York's Museum of
Modern Art's
new exhibit of the works of
Edgar Degas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday: Making Sense of
great vacation
deals using budget airlines.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.